Adding Java XXE Cheatsheet (#804)
returntocorp/semgrep-docs: docs/cheat-sheets/java-xxe.mdx

---
slug: java-xxe
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

# XML External Entity prevention for Java

> This is an XML External Entity (XXE) prevention cheat sheet by r2c. It contains code patterns of potential XXE in an application. The recommendations in this cheat sheet pave a safe road for developers that mitigate the possibility of XXE in your code. By following these recommendations, you can be reasonably sure that their code is free of XXE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an XML External Entity (XXE) prevention cheat sheet by r2c. It contains code patterns of potential XXE in an application. The recommendations in this cheat sheet pave a safe road for developers that mitigate the possibility of XXE in their code. By following these recommendations, you can be reasonably sure that their code is free of XXE.
```

## Mitigation Summary

> XML security in Java is not easy to summarize. The XML standard allows multiple ways to include external content, including but not limited to external Document Type Definitions (DTD), external Entity References to external data, general entity references, and external parameter references. There are also several ways to include external content in XML Schemas and stylesheets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is not easy to summarize XML security in Java. The XML standard allows multiple ways to include external content, including but not limited to external Document Type Definitions (DTD), external Entity References to external data, general entity references, and external parameter references. There are also several ways to include external content in XML Schemas and stylesheets.
```

## 2. XML External Entity Injection

XML External Entity Injection occurs when the system identifier to some of the external content contains data controlled by an attacker. The parser then dereferences this identifier containing attacker-controlled XML code, leading to the disclosure of confidential data, or even to arbitrary code execution.

### 2.A Ways to include external content in XML documents

There are many potential ways in which external resources can be referenced in XML documents, XML Schemas, and XSLT stylesheets. External content can be loaded through an External Document Type Definition (DTD), an External Entity Reference to external data, a General Entity reference, or an External Parameter Entity reference. Additional XML code can also be included through `XInclude`, or references to XML Schema components using the `schemaLocation` attribute of `import` or `include` elements. In stylesheets, multiple sheets can be combined using the `xsl:include` element, the `?xml-stylesheet` processing instruction, or the `document()` function.

> For examples of each of these ways of including external resources, see the [Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) Security Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/13/security/java-api-xml-processing-jaxp-security-guide.html) or take a look at r2c's [research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/tree/main/payloads-new).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For examples of each of these ways of including external resources, see the [Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) Security Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/13/security/java-api-xml-processing-jaxp-security-guide.html) in Oracle documentation. In addition, you can review r2c's [research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/tree/main/payloads-new).
```

            </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <code>setAttribute(XMLConstants.<b>ACCESS_EXTERNAL_SCHEMA</b>, "")</code>
            </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <code>setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/<b>disallow-doctype-decl</b>", true)</code>
            </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> All other features
            </td>
            <td> n/a </td>
            <td> n/a </td>
            <td> n/a </td>
            <td> n/a </td>
            <td> n/a </td>
            <td> n/a </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
</font>

#### Validator 

> Validators can only process XML documents, no XSL or XSD.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validators can only process XML documents, not XSL or XSD.
```

There are also several ways to include external content in XML Schemas and stylesheets.

On the other hand, the Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) contains multiple interfaces to process XML content. The Document Object Model (DOM) interface, the Simple API for XML (SAX) interface, and the Streaming API for XML (StAX) interface.
Each of these interfaces has its mitigation measures to disable allowing the use of different sources of external content.
The inconsistency in availability and even the effect of these measures across the different APIs, combined with the variety of ways to include external content, makes it difficult to make a general recommendation. Many configurations that are secure for one parser are not secure for another.
However, the following settings have a consistent effect on a subset of parsers

- For `DocumentBuilderFactory`. `SAXBuilder`, `SAXParser`, `SAXReader`, and `XMLReader` use:
    ```
    setFeature(http://apache.org/xml/features/disallow-doctype-decl, true);
    ```
- For `SAXTransformer`, `SchemaFactory`, and `Validator` use:
    ```
    setFeature(XMLConstants.FEATURE_SECURE_PROCESSING, true);
    ```

> The complete Semgrep ruleset for this cheatsheet is available as part of the rules available in the Team tier. This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Reviewer: @0xDC0DE Please, include a link to this ruleset. Only users of the Team tier will be able to access it.

---

## 1. Exponential entity expansion

> Exponential entity expansion occurs when there are several layers of nested entities that each on their own reference several other entities.

Reviewer: Optional:
```suggestion
Exponential entity expansion occurs when there are several layers of nested entities that reference several other entities.
```

> You can find an example of such a payload, sometimes called an XML Bomb, in [r2c's research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/blob/main/payloads-new/xml-attacks/xml-bomb.xml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See an example of such a payload, called also an XML Bomb, in [r2c's research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/blob/main/payloads-new/xml-attacks/xml-bomb.xml).
```

To disable DTD processing with one of the available mechanisms:

- The `setFeature` method with the following URL: `http://apache.org/xml/features/disallow-doctype-decl`
- The `setProperty` method to set `XMLInputFactory.SUPPORT_DTD` to false.
- The `setAttribute` method to set `XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_DTD` to an empty string (`“”`). 

For some parsers, there are multiple methods to disable DTD processing. For most parsers, this setting adds additional security for processing XML documents. However, this does not affect the processing of schemas or stylesheets. Still, there are classes such as `DocumentBuilderFactory`, `Validator`, and `SchemaFactory` with multiple methods to disable DTD, and setting the above-mentioned features throws no exceptions, but only one of them has any effect on the security of the parser.

#### Disabling external schema and stylesheet processing

The `setAttribute` method can be used to set `XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_SCHEMA` and `XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_STYLESHEET` to an empty string to disable these features.
The effects on security, however, are often limited, with no observed effect for several classes.

#### Disabling external entities

> The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to `false`. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!

Author: Ahhh! It is the disabling of them that protects against all payloads. I can see how that is confusing! I will rephrase it.

> The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to `false`. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `setFeature` to `false` to disable `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` classes. When both of these classes are disabled, the parser is protected against all of the tested payloads.
```

> The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to `false`. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!

Reviewer: So what about @0xDC0DE:

```suggestion
Set `setFeature` to `false` to disable `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` classes. When both of these classes are disabled, the parser is protected against all of the tested payloads.
```

> The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to `false`. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!

Author: Those are not classes. They are features.

```
Set `setFeature` to `false` to disable `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` features. When both of these features are disabled, the parser is protected against all of the tested payloads.
```

> The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to `false`. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set `setFeature` to `false` to disable `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` features. When both of these features are disabled, the parser is protected against all of the tested payloads.
```

> The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to `false`. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!

Author: Perfect!

---
slug: java-xxe
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

# XML External Entity prevention for Java

This is an XML External Entity (XXE) prevention cheat sheet by r2c. It contains code patterns of potential XXE in an application. The recommendations in this cheat sheet pave a safe road for developers that mitigate the possibility of XXE in their code. By following these recommendations, you can be reasonably sure that their code is free of XXE.

## Mitigation Summary

It is not easy to summarize XML security in Java. The XML standard allows multiple ways to include external content, including but not limited to external Document Type Definitions (DTD), external Entity References to external data, general entity references, and external parameter references. There are also several ways to include external content in XML Schemas and stylesheets.

> The Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) contains multiple interfaces to process XML content. The Document Object Model (DOM) interface, the Simple API for XML (SAX) interface, and the Streaming API for XML (StAX) interface. Each of these interfaces has its mitigation measures to disable the use of different sources of external content. The inconsistency in availability and even the effect of these measures across the different APIs, combined with the variety of ways to include external content, makes it difficult to make a general recommendation. Many configurations that are secure for one parser are not secure for another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) contains multiple interfaces to process XML content:

- The Document Object Model (DOM) interface
- The Simple API for XML (SAX) interface
- The Streaming API for XML (StAX) interface

Each of these interfaces has its mitigation measures to disable the use of different sources of external content. The inconsistency in availability and even the effect of these measures across the different APIs, combined with the variety of ways to include external content makes it difficult to provide general mitigation recommendations. Many configurations that are secure for one parser are not secure for another.
```

---
slug: java-xxe
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

# XML External Entity prevention for Java

This is an XML External Entity (XXE) prevention cheat sheet by r2c. It contains code patterns of potential XXE in an application. The recommendations in this cheat sheet pave a safe road for developers that mitigate the possibility of XXE in their code. By following these recommendations, you can be reasonably sure that their code is free of XXE.

## Mitigation Summary

It is not easy to summarize Java XML security. The XML standard allows multiple ways to include external content, including but not limited to external Document Type Definitions (DTD), external Entity References to external data, general entity references, and external parameter references. There are also several ways to include external content in XML Schemas and stylesheets.

The Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) contains multiple interfaces to process XML content:

- The Document Object Model (DOM) interface
- The Simple API for XML (SAX) interface
- The Streaming API for XML (StAX) interface

> Each of these interfaces has its mitigation measures to disable the use of different sources of external content. The&nbsp;inconsistency in availability and even the effect of these measures across the different APIs, combined with the variety of ways to include external content makes it difficult to provide general mitigation recommendations. Many configurations that are secure for one parser are not secure for another.

Reviewer 2: Why the `&nbsp;` in `The&nbsp;inconsistency`?

Reviewer: Just to prevent a line break after The. But I guess this does not make sense as everyone will have a different resolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each of these interfaces has its mitigation measures to disable the use of different sources of external content. The inconsistency in availability and even the effect of these measures across the different APIs, combined with the variety of ways to include external content makes it difficult to provide general mitigation recommendations. Many configurations that are secure for one parser are not secure for another.
```

> However, the following settings have a consistent effect on a subset of parsers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the following settings have a consistent effect on a subset of parsers:
```

- For `SAXBuilder`, `SAXParser`, and `XMLReader` use:
    ```java
    setAttribute(XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_DTD, "");
    ```
- For `DocumentBuilderFactory`, `TransformerFactory`, `SAXTransformer`, `SchemaFactory`, and `Validator` use:
    ```java
    setFeature(XMLConstants.FEATURE_SECURE_PROCESSING, true);
    ```
- For `SAXReader` the only secure configuration is:
    ```java
    setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/<b>disallow-doctype-decl", true);

    ```

> The complete [Semgrep ruleset](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is available as part of the rules available in the Team tier. This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Reviewer 2: Technically it's not a ruleset but just a set of rules. Theres also a redundancy of "available" in this sentence. I would rephrase as `The complete set of rules that covers the vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is distributed as part of the rules available in the Team tier. It includes rules to verify ...`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete [Semgrep ruleset](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is distributed as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). It includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.
```

> The complete [Semgrep ruleset](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is available as part of the rules available in the Team tier. This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Author: The list above this sentence is ways that a *single* security feature secures a parser. However, it is possible to combine several security features and still protect the parser against all 10 payloads. These are the "several other combinations" that are taken into account into the rule and won't flag your code if you use those instead of the ones I specifically recommend here.

> The complete [Semgrep ruleset](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is available as part of the rules available in the Team tier. This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Reviewer: @0xDC0DE thanks! Let me know whether I captured your idea in this suggestion (resolving this thread as it is marked as Outdated due to src changes above): https://github.com/returntocorp/semgrep-docs/pull/804/files#r1063303034

> The complete [Semgrep ruleset](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is available as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete Semgrep [set of rules](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is available as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.
```

> The complete Semgrep [set of rules](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is available as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The complete Semgrep [set of rules](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is distributed as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.
```

> The complete Semgrep [set of rules](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is distributed as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This ruleset includes rules to verify these settings as well as several other combinations that are secure.

Reviewer: @0xDC0DE reacting on https://github.com/returntocorp/semgrep-docs/pull/804#discussion_r1062595874 - let me know whether this seems better:

```suggestion
The complete Semgrep [set of rules](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is distributed as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This set of rules verifies the settings mentioned in the list above and also includes combinations of several other security features.
```

The following infographics provides Java XXE security features overview:

![XXE Java security features overview infographics](/img/cheat-sheets-xxe-java-infographics.png "XXE Java security features overview infographics")

---

> ## 1. Exponential entity expansion

Reviewer 2: Maybe this should all capitals like XML External Entity Injection?

Reviewer: We use sentence case for headers usually, the XML External Entity Injection should be in sentence case (XML external entity injection) - or XML eXternal Entity injection (XXE) - as [OWASP mentions](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/XML_External_Entity_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html), I will edit this properly. Thanks!

Reviewer: The main question here is whether External Entity Injection is a proper noun. It seems not when I am searching for it, what do you think @p4p3r?

Reviewer 2: OWASP is inconsistent in the way they capitalize this, even in that same page you linked.
The most common way to write it I've seen is XML External Entity Injection, which is why I would also write XML Exponential Entity Expansion (for "visual" consistency)... but you're the expert here @adamkvitek :-)

Reviewer: I might go rather with XML external entity injection and XML exponential entity expansion...

> Exponential entity expansion occurs when there are several layers of nested entities that reference several other entities.

Reviewer 2: Same capitals here

Reviewer: Note for myself - https://github.com/returntocorp/semgrep-docs/pull/804#discussion_r1062344583

See an example of such a payload, called also an XML bomb, in [r2c's research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/blob/main/payloads-new/xml-attacks/xml-bomb.xml).

> When a document containing an XML bomb is parsed, the parser expands each of the nested references. Consequently, this expansion becomes exponential leading to excessive use of resources and Denial-of-Service (DoS).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a document that contains an XML bomb is parsed, the parser expands each of the nested references. Consequently, this expansion becomes exponential leading to excessive use of resources and Denial-of-Service (DoS).
```

We found that in Java, the JDK throws an exception when such excessive use of resources is detected. 
Using this exception, if it is carefully caught and handled, the attack can be prevented. In such a case, no explicit security measures need to be taken. This is the case for all recent versions of Java (17, 18, 19) and all older versions with long-term support (8, 11).

> ## 2. XML External Entity Injection

Reviewer 2: There is something that feels a bit off to me in the way the content has been organized.
The first subsection (exponential entity expansion) is actually about a sligthly different attack which is somewhat unrelated to the actual cheatsheet (which is about xxe). Maybe it could be worth having a distinct section explaining what the two types of attacks and then a separate section on Security Measures?
Exact sames content as now but "spread" a bit differently.

Reviewer: @0xDC0DE - please check 🙏

Reviewer: @p4p3r the exponential entity expansion section mentions XML bomb which is then referenced in subsection 3 which includes results of tests also from section 2. We were not entirely sure how to make this better - other cheat sheets usually tell details about specific vulnerabilities in each of the sections - but here we tell something about vulnerability 1, and vulnerability 2 and then offer an exhaustive synthesis of the whole research in tables of section 3. Maybe we should mention this in the beginning (also @0xDC0DE let me know if I am right in describing what we tried to achieve here).

Reviewer: Also, the article itself is named  External entity prevention for Java - but we are discussing exponential entity expansion also...

Author: My take on this:
XXE (=Xml eXternal Entity) is a feature of XML parsers.

The two attacks explained here both work by manipulating this feature:
- exponential Xml External Entity expansion
- Xml External Entity injection

OWASP description of XXE (https://owasp.org/www-community/vulnerabilities/XML_External_Entity_(XXE)_Processing):
"An XML External Entity attack is a type of attack against an application that parses XML input. This attack occurs when XML input containing a reference to an external entity is processed by a weakly configured XML parser."
--> description fits both attacks

Portswigger calls it "XML external entity (XXE) injection" (https://portswigger.net/web-security/xxe)
--> uses a specific name "injection"

hackerone:
"XML External Entity (XXE) is an application-layer cybersecurity attack that exploits an XXE vulnerability to parse XML input. XXE attacks are possible when a poorly configured parser processes XML input with a pathway to an external entity. This can damage organizations in various ways, including denial of service (DoS), sensitive data exposure, server-side request forgery (SSRF), and port scanning from the parser’s locations."
--> description fits both attacks (even mentions DoS which is fits the exponential expansion)

Author: Decision: write a good introduction that sets expectations that both attacks are handled here. So that the heading for exponential xml external entity expansion does not surprise readers.

> XML External Entity Injection occurs when the system identifier to some of the external content contains data controlled by an attacker. The parser then dereferences this identifier containing attacker-controlled XML code, leading to the disclosure of confidential data, or even to arbitrary code execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XML external entity injection occurs when the system identifier to some of the external content contains data controlled by an attacker. The parser then dereferences this identifier containing attacker-controlled XML code, leading to the disclosure of confidential data, or even to arbitrary code execution.
```

Except for the `Validator` class, where they have no effect at all.
There is also `setExpandEntityReferences` that can be set to `false` and seems to have the same effect as disabling external general entities, based on our testing.

## 3. Overview of the effect of security measures for each class

Summarizing security measures against XXE is not easy as not all security measures work for every class (as mentioned in section [2.B Security measures](#2b-security-measures)). The tables below this section can help you to choose the best security measures against a specific vulnerability.

:::info Table legend
- Each table represents one Java class. For example `DocumentBuilderFactory`.
- Columns display attack payloads that can be potentially used to exploit a vulnerability (for example DTD or XML bomb).
- Rows represent ways to configure the parsers.

✅ - Secure<br />
❌ - Not Secure<br />
⚠️  - An exception is thrown<br />
N/A - Not available
:::

### 3.A DocumentBuilderFactory

> [`javax.xml.parsers.DocumentBuilderFactory`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/javax/xml/parsers/DocumentBuilderFactory.html) can be used to process all payload types. By default it is vulnerable against 4 of the attack payloads.

Reviewer 3: I noticed that all of the Oracle links point to the Java 7 docs, which hit EOL last year. Is there a more recent version of the docs that you'd feel comfortable pointing to? Hopefully there isn't much of a diff between 7 and 19 (latest version)

Author: Good catch!

<font size="2">
<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>

>             <th rowspan="3">Security feature</th>

Reviewer 3: Is "Security feature" the best name for this column? Something like "Parser configuration" or just "Configuration" feels more accurate to me

Author: I agree!

            </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ✅ </td>
            <td> ✅ </td>
            <td> ✅ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ✅ </td>
            <td> ✅ </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <code>setAttribute(XMLConstants. <b>ACCESS_EXTERNAL_STYLESHEET</b>, "")</code>
            </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> All other features
            </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
</font>

### 3.E SAXReader

> [`org.dom4j.io.SAXReader`](https://dom4j.github.io/javadoc/2.0.1/org/dom4j/io/SAXReader.html) can process all 10 payloads. Its default configuration is vulnerable to 4 of the attack payloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`org.dom4j.io.SAXReader`](https://dom4j.github.io/javadoc/2.0.1/org/dom4j/io/SAXReader.html) can process all 10 payloads. In its default configuration, it is vulnerable to 4 of the attack payloads.
```

            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <code>setAttribute(XMLConstants.<b>ACCESS_EXTERNAL_SCHEMA</b>, "")</code>
            </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                <code>setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/<b>disallow-doctype-decl</b>", true)</code>
            </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ✅⚠️  </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
            <td> ❌ </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td> All other features
            </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
            <td> N/A </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
</font>

### 3.H Validator 

[`javax.xml.validation.Validator`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/javax/xml/validation/Validator.html) can only process XML documents, not XSL or XSD. 

> Out of the 3 attack payloads it can process, the default configuration is vulnerable to 2 of them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of the 3 attack payloads it can process, the default configuration is vulnerable to 2.
```

---
slug: java-xxe
toc_max_heading_level: 4
---

# XML External entity prevention for Java

> This is an XML External Entity (XXE) prevention cheat sheet by r2c. It contains code patterns of potential XXE in an application. The recommendations in this cheat sheet pave a safe road for developers that mitigate the possibility of XXE in their code. By following these recommendations, you can be reasonably sure that their code is free of XXE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an XML External Entity (XXE) prevention cheat sheet by r2c. It contains code patterns of potential XXE in an application. The recommendations in this cheat sheet pave a safe road for developers that mitigate the possibility of XXE in their code. By following these recommendations, you can be reasonably sure that their code is free of XXE.
```

> In this document, we discuss two attacks related to XML external entities: exponential entity expansion, and entity injection. In Java, applications are secure from exponential entity expansion by default, so no mitigations are necessary. To protect an XML parser in Java from XML External Entity Injection, on the other hand, many counter measures exist, not all of them effective. In this cheat sheet, we discuss what these measures are and test their availablity and effect on several Java classes that process XML documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article documents two attacks related to XML external entities: XML exponential entity expansion and XML external entity injection. In Java, applications are secure from exponential entity expansion by default, and as a consequence, no mitigations are necessary. In contrast, there are various countermeasures to protect a Java XML parser from XML external entity injection, but not all of them are effective. This cheat sheet also provides results of testing, availability, and the effect of different security measures on several Java classes that process XML documents in section [3. Overview of the effect of security measures for each class](#3-overview-of-the-effect-of-security-measures-for-each-class).
```

However, the following security settings have a consistent effect on specific parsers:

- For `SAXBuilder`, `SAXParser`, and `XMLReader` use:
    ```java
    setAttribute(XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_DTD, "");
    ```
- For `DocumentBuilderFactory`, `TransformerFactory`, `SAXTransformer`, `SchemaFactory`, and `Validator` use:
    ```java
    setFeature(XMLConstants.FEATURE_SECURE_PROCESSING, true);
    ```
- For `SAXReader` the only secure configuration is:
    ```java
    setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/<b>disallow-doctype-decl", true);

    ```

The complete Semgrep [set of rules](https://semgrep.dev/r?q=java.lang.security.xxe&lang=Java) that covers vulnerabilities mentioned in this cheat sheet is distributed as part of the rules available in the [Team tier](https://semgrep.dev/pricing). This set of rules verifies the settings mentioned in the list above and also includes combinations of several other security features.

> The following infographics provides Java XXE security features overview:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following infographic provides an overview of Java XXE security features:
```

![XXE Java security features overview infographics](/img/cheat-sheets-xxe-java-infographics.png "XXE Java security features overview infographics")

---

## 1. Exponential entity expansion

Exponential entity expansion occurs when several layers of nested entities reference several other entities.
See an example of such a payload, called also an XML bomb, in [r2c's research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/blob/main/payloads-new/xml-attacks/xml-bomb.xml).

> When a document that contains an XML bomb is parsed, the parser expands each of the nested references. Consequently, this expansion becomes exponential leading to excessive use of resources and denial-of-service attack (DoS).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When a document that contains an XML bomb is parsed, the parser expands each of the nested references. Consequently, this expansion becomes exponential leading to excessive use of resources and denial-of-service attacks (DoS).
```

> We found that in Java, the JDK throws an exception when such excessive use of resources is detected. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In Java, the JDK throws an exception when such excessive use of resources is detected. 
```

For examples of each of these ways of including external resources, see the [Java API for XML Processing (JAXP) Security Guide](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/13/security/java-api-xml-processing-jaxp-security-guide.html) in Oracle documentation. In addition, you can review r2c's [research project on GitHub](https://github.com/returntocorp/java-xxe-research/tree/main/payloads-new).

### 2.B Security measures

There are several security measures, but not all of them are available for each class. See an overview of which measures are available for which class in section [3. Overview of the effect of security measures for each class](#3-overview-of-the-effect-of-security-measures-for-each-class) with r2c research results.

#### Feature for Secure Processing (FSP)

Feature for Secure Processing (FSP) is considered the central mechanism for secure XML processing. It is defined as `javax.xml.XMLConstants.FEATURE_SECURE_PROCESSING`.
For various classes, this feature can protect the parser from all available payloads. However, this is not the case for all of the classes that have been tested to create this cheat sheet.

#### Disabling DTD processing

> To disable DTD processing with one of the available mechanisms:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Disable DTD processing with one of the available mechanisms:
```

        <xi:include href=toc.xml"/>
        <xi:include href=part1.xml"/>
        <xi:include href=part2.xml"/>
        <xi:include href=index.xml"/>
    </Book>
    ```
- References to XML Schema components using the schemaLocation attribute and import and include elements, for example:
    ```xml
    <xs:schema xmlns:xs="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema">
        <xs:include schemaLocation="http://www.example.com/schema/schema1.xsd"/>
        <!-- ... -->
    </xs:schema>
    ```
- Combining style sheets using import or include elements, the following is the syntax:
    ```xml
    <xsl:include href="include.xsl"/>
    ```
- `xml-stylesheet` processing instruction: Used to include a stylesheet in an XML document, for example:
    ```xml
    <?xml-stylesheet href="include.xsl" type="text/xsl"?>
    ```
- XSLT document() function: Used to access nodes in an external XML document, for example:
    ```xml
    <xsl:variable name="dummy" select="document('DocumentFunc2.xml')"/>
    ```

#### References

- [Oracle Docs](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/13/security/java-api-xml-processing-jaxp-security-guide.html)

### 2.B Security measures

> There are a number of security measures, not all of them are available for each class. To see an overview of which measures are available for which class, consult the docs, or go to Section 3 to view the tables with our research results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several security measures, but not all of them are available for each class. To see an overview of which measures are available for which class, consult the docs, or go to Section 3 to view the tables with our research results.
```

#### Feature for Secure Processing (FSP)

Feature for Secure Processing (FSP) is considered the central mechanism for secure XML processing. It is defined as `javax.xml.XMLConstants.FEATURE_SECURE_PROCESSING`.

> For a number of classes this feature is able to protect the parser from all available payloads, but this is not the case for all of the classes we tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For various classes, this feature can protect the parser from all available payloads. This is however not the case for all of the classes we tested.
```

#### Disabling DTD processing

> To disable DTD processing there are a few mechanisms available:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To disable DTD processing with one of the available mechanisms:
```

> - The `setFeature` method with the following url: `http://apache.org/xml/features/disallow-doctype-decl`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `setFeature` method with the following URL: `http://apache.org/xml/features/disallow-doctype-decl`
```

- The `setProperty` method to set `XMLInputFactory.SUPPORT_DTD` to false.
- The `setAttribute` method to set `XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_DTD` to an empty string (`“”`). 

For some parsers, multiple of these methods are available. 

> For most parsers this setting adds additional security for processing XML documents, but it never has any effect on processing schemas or stylesheets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most parsers, this setting adds additional security for processing XML documents. However, this does not affect the processing of schemas or stylesheets.
```

> However, there are classes such as `DocumentBuilderFactory`, `Validator`, and `SchemaFactory` where multiple of these methods are available, and setting the above mentioned features throws no exceptions, but only one of them has any effect on the security of the parser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are classes such as `DocumentBuilderFactory`, `Validator`, and `SchemaFactory` where multiple of these methods are available, and setting the above-mentioned features throws no exceptions, but only one of them has any effect on the security of the parser.
```

#### Disabling external schema and stylesheet processing

The `setAttribute` method can be used to set `XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_SCHEMA` and `XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_STYLESHEET` to an empty string to disable these features.
The effects on security, however, are often limited, with no observed effect for a number of classes.

#### Disabling external general entities and external parameter entities

The  `setFeature` method can be used to set `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` to false. For the classes where these features are available, the combination of these two protects the parser against all of the tested payloads!
Except for the `Validator` class, where they have no effect at all.
There is also `setExpandEntityReferences` that can be set to false and seems to have the same effect as disabling external general entities, based on our testing.

> 

Reviewer: With `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities` and `http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities` - are these methods, calls to some specific URLs - what are they? Can we state this after we list them?

## 3 Overview of effect of security measures for each class

✅ Secure
❌ Not Secure
⚠️  An exception is thrown

> 

Reviewer: What do the tables below provide? Can we write a short introduction?

| setAttribute(XMLConstants.ACCESS_EXTERNAL_STYLESHEET, "");                          | n/a      | n/a | n/a              | n/a | n/a    | n/a     | n/a      | n/a | n/a    | n/a     |
| setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/disallow-doctype-decl", true)            | ✅⚠️       | ✅⚠️  | ✅⚠️               | ✅⚠️  | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ✅⚠️  | ✅      | ✅       |
| setFeature("http://xml.org/sax/features/external-general-entities", false)          | ✅⚠️       | ✅   | ❌                | ✅   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ✅   | ✅      | ✅       |
| setFeature("http://xml.org/sax/features/external-parameter-entities", false)        | ✅⚠️       | ❌   | ✅                | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       |
| setExpandEntities(false)                                                            | ✅⚠️       | ✅   | ❌                | ✅   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ✅   | ✅      | ✅       |
| setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/xinclude", false)                        | ✅⚠️       | ❌   | ❌                | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       |

> | setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/nonvalidating/load-external-dtd", false) | ✅⚠️       | ❌   | ❌                | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       |

Reviewer: Note to all of these tables (even below) - how do these settings look in code? Maybe we should mark them all as inline code?

For example:
`setFeature(XMLConstants.FEATURE_SECURE_PROCESSING, true)`

Not sure how to mark the: default, Default config DTDValidating, Default config XSDValidating.

> ### 3.C SAXParserFactory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SAXParserFactory
```

| setXIncludeAware(false)                                                             | ✅⚠️       | ❌   | ❌                | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       |
| setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/xinclude", false)                        | ✅⚠️       | ❌   | ❌                | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       |
| setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/nonvalidating/load-external-dtd", false) | ✅⚠️       | ❌   | ❌                | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       | ✅        | ❌   | ✅      | ✅       |
| setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/nonvalidating/load-dtd-grammar", false)  | n/a      | n/a | n/a              | n/a | n/a    | n/a     | n/a      | n/a | n/a    | n/a     |
| setFeature("http://apache.org/xml/features/namespaces", false)                      | n/a      | n/a | n/a              | n/a | n/a    | n/a     | n/a      | n/a | n/a    | n/a     |
| setNamespaceAware(true)                                                             | n/a      | n/a | n/a              | n/a | n/a    | n/a     | n/a      | n/a | n/a    | n/a     |

> ### 3.D SAXParser

Reviewer: I am really not sure about the structure here... if we need these tables only to accompany the blog post, this can be done in r2c blog also. I am not sure about numbering here...
